# The Clinical Problem - Digital Pathology for Frozen Sections in Invasive Lobular Carcinoma of the Breast

## Table Of Contents
* [Breast Cancer and its Subtypes](#breast-cancer-and-its-subtypes)
* [Digital Pathology and Invasive Lobular Carcinoma](#digital-pathology-and-invasive-lobular-carcinoma)
* [Advantages of a digitization for frozen section staging](advantages-of-digitization-for-frozen-section-staining))

## Breast Cancer and its Subtypes
Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers in women. A diagnosis of breast cancer can be devastating to both the diagnosed individual and their existing social networks. Every interaction with the medical system following a cancer diagnosis can influence both treatment outcomes and overall patient well being. While Oncologists and surgeons have the most visible roles in providing cancer care, they cannot act without accurate and timely diagnostic information from the pathologist. 

In Breast Cancer, several factors influence the clinical approach. Initial detection may occur through routine screening mammograms, or in the course of investigating a clinical complaint. Diagnositic imaging can provide vital data about the size, shape, and internal features of a tumor, but this information is inadequate for treatment planning. Pathologists, typically reviewing FFPE sections from biopsies, provide more detailed information about the features of the tumor at a cellular level, which is necessary in planning treatment approaches. From simple hematoxylin and eosin dye stained tissue sections, a skilled pathologist can identify the proliferative tendency of the tumor, in the form of the mitotic index, the degree of cellular irregularity, and the configuration of the nucleus. The appearance and arrangement of cells can also distinguish between the two major histologic subtypes of breast cancer, Invasive ductal carcinoma and invasive lobular carcinoma. 

While ductal carcinoma is more common and deadly, the unique features of lobular carcinoma have made it an increasingly popular topic of research. ILC is often described as "E-cadherin negative" breast cancer, which reflects dysfunction in one of the key proteins that regulates cellular structure and cell-to-cell adhesion. These dysfunctional tumor cells often appear small, round, and dark, classically arraging themselves into linear streams of cells, unlike the classic clusters of irregularly enlarged cells characteristic of IDC. This morphology is difficult in that it resembles that of lymphocytes, the class of immune cells that frequently infiltrate cancers and are a major component of lymph nodes. 

## Digital Pathology and Invasive Lobular Carcinoma

Detecting lymph node metastases from the "invasive lobular carcinoma" subtype of breast cancer is an ideal use case for a mature digital pathology stack.
Effective treatment of the tumor requires removing as many traces of the disease as possible, to prevent re-seeding of the initial tumor bed or metastasis throughout the body. Locally, the surgeon strives for "negative margins" which are reflected by the presence of a border of normal tissue around tumor tissue. Anatomic pathologists typically stand-by for surgeons during these operations to review intra-operative pathology. In addition to reviewing frozen sections of excised primary tumor to confirm negative margins, surgeons also strive to "stage" the tumor by identifying the degree of growth outside of its initial source tissue. While the exact mechanics of metastasis are complex, the consensus is that breast cancer metastasis involves dissemination of tumor cells through the lymphatic system. As lymphatic drainage is a well defined feature of human anatomy, surgeons consider the review of proximal "sentinel" lymph nodes necessary for the complete staging of a breast tumor. 
As with revieing primary tumor sections to identify margins of resection, the standby pathologist depends on rapidly prepared frozen sections of sentinel lymph nodes to made the determination if any tumor cells are present in lymph nodes.
 
 Identifying lymph nodes metastasis from breast cancer affects tumor staging, which can affect both the same-day actions of the surgeon and the later decision to pursue a particular course of treatment. Failure to identify lymph node metastases may require costly and painful additional surgery, and may result in a treatment delay with dire consequences. Overidentification of nodal metastasis is also harmful however, as the resection of a contaminated node bed may lead to painful chronic side-effects like lymphedema in a patient who may have otherwise been cured through surgery alone. 

The possibility of misdiagnosis of ILC nodal metastasis is high due to the similar morphology of specifically ILC tumor epithelium and the resident immune cells of the lymph node. Both cell types can appear as small, round groups of cells with well defined nuclei. ILC tumor cells lack much of the structural abnormalities that make identification of nodal metastases from the more common "invasive ductal carcinoma" subtype  much easier to do. Intra-operative diagnoses, the sort that would be used to guide decision-making regarding the need for lymph node bed resection, is performed on rapidly fixed and stained sections of flash frozen tissue. These "frozen sections" can be very high quality, but they can also lack the detail and resolution of the slowly prepared formalin-fixed and paraffin-embeded slides used to provide final diagnoses. In trying to detect subtle differences between otherwise similar-appearing cell types, the sometimes poor quality of ILC lymph node frozen sections can contribute to misdiagnosis, particularly when exacerbated by clinician fatigue. 

## Advantages of a digitization for frozen section staging
While digital pathology workstations are increasingly common in pathologists offices, the frozen section room has seen little growth in the use of digital methods. This is understandable, as digitization introduces additional time and complexity to a process that must function efficiently as a matter of patient safety. However, while the addition of a slide digitization step to the frozen section workflow may seem unnecessary to experienced pathologists, improvements in scanner speed and digital pathology software may make digital pathology seem like the natural solution to the next generation of anatomic pathologists. 

Digitization offers myriad advantages to the pathologist and the broader clinical team. WSI generated from frozen sections could be easily shared with colleagues and students soon after scanning, improving pedagogy and offering the opportunity to informally consult with colleagues and difficult diagnoses without the need to share the slide itself. Whole slide images can be quantitatively analyzed to detemine if they meet pre-defined QC metrics, ensuring that diagnosis is only performed using diagnostically useful material. Image enhancement and artifact cleanup algorithms can improved the clarity of hastily prepared frozen WSI, potentially saving both time and money. Segmentation and Classification algorithms might also assist the working pathologist, highlighting areas of interest or catching elements that might be missed by the busy pathologist. Finally, the digitally analyzed WSI may have considerable utility in controlling liability, as it and any annotations can be easily reviewed without concern for degradation over time. 

By updating the frozen section workflow for the digital pathology era, the speed, safety, accuracy, and convenience of surgical pathology may improve considerably. 
